modules/documentation/adminguide/asciidoc/text/Admin_Guide_28_-_Database_Management.asciidoc, before:

[[databasemgnt]]
= Database Management
:author: daniel wisnewski
:version: v1.0 July 2015
:date: 2015-07-16 12:49

:website: http://tigase.net

Tigase is coded to perform with multiple database types and numbers.
Owing to it's versatile nature, there are some tools and procedures that may be of use to certain administrators.

== Recommended database versions
As of v7.2.0-SNAPSHOT here are the minimum and recommended versions of databases for use with Tigase:


[width="100%",frame="topbot",options="header"]
|=================================
|Database   |Recommended Version  |Minimum Version  |Additional Information
|DerbyDB    |10.12.1.1            |10.12.1.1        |Included with Tigase XMPP Server
|MySQL      |5.7                  |5.6              |
|SQLServer  |2014                 |2012             |2012 needed so we can count use fetch-offset pagination feature.
|PostgreSQL |9.5                  |9.4              |New UA schema requires at least 9.4
|MongoDB    |3.2                  |3.0              |
|MariaDB    |?                    |10.0.12          |Basic features works with 10.0.12-MariaDB Homebrew, but is not fully tested.
|=================================

Although Tigase may support other versions of databases, these are the ones we are most familiar with in offering support and advice.  Use of databases outside these guidelines may result in unforeseen errors.

Commit message:

Task #4732 - updated MySQL JDBC driver due to lack of support for precise timestamps

modules/documentation/adminguide/asciidoc/text/Admin_Guide_28_-_Database_Management.asciidoc, after:

[[databasemgnt]]
= Database Management
:author: daniel wisnewski
:version: v1.0 July 2015
:date: 2015-07-16 12:49

:website: http://tigase.net

Tigase is coded to perform with multiple database types and numbers.
Owing to it's versatile nature, there are some tools and procedures that may be of use to certain administrators.

== Recommended database versions
As of v7.2.0-SNAPSHOT here are the minimum and recommended versions of databases for use with Tigase:


[width="100%",frame="topbot",options="header"]
|=================================
|Database   |Recommended Version  |Minimum Version  |Additional Information
|DerbyDB    |10.12.1.1            |10.12.1.1        |Included with Tigase XMPP Server
|MySQL      |5.7                  |5.6.4              |Required to properly support timestamp storage with millisecond precision
|SQLServer  |2014                 |2012             |2012 needed so we can count use fetch-offset pagination feature.
|PostgreSQL |9.5                  |9.4              |New UA schema requires at least 9.4
|MongoDB    |3.2                  |3.0              |
|MariaDB    |?                    |10.0.12          |Basic features works with 10.0.12-MariaDB Homebrew, but is not fully tested.
|=================================

Although Tigase may support other versions of databases, these are the ones we are most familiar with in offering support and advice.  Use of databases outside these guidelines may result in unforeseen errors.
