modules/documentation/adminguide/asciidoc/text/Admin_Guide_65_-_Components_-_F_-_Server_Monitoring_-_1_-_Setting_up_Remote_Monitoring_in_the_Server.asciidoc, before:

[[setUpRemoteMonitoring]]
Setting Up Remote Monitoring in the Server
==========================================
:author: unknown
:version: v1.0
:date: 2010-04-06 21:18

Tigase server can be remotely monitored over following protocols: *JMX/RMI*, *SNMP* and *HTTP*. Even though JMX offers the biggest control and visibility to the server states, all of the monitoring services give the same basic set of the server statistics:

- Number of network connections for s2s, c2s and Bosh
- Last second, last minute and last hour load for all main components: SM, MR, c2s, s2s, Bosh, MUC and PubSub
- System statistics - memory usage (heap and non heap) and the server uptime in milliseconds and human readable text.
- Users statistics - number of registered users and number of online user session.

JMX/RMI and SNMP servers offer basic security and can restrict access while the HTTP server doesn't offer any access restriction mechanisms. Therefore HTTP monitoring is recommended to operate behind a firewall.

The monitoring itself causes very low overhead in terms of the resources and CPU consumption on top of the normal Tigase processing requirements so it can be left on without worrying about performance degradation.

*Note.* _This works with the Tigase server from version_ *4.2.0* _or SVN revision_ *1418*.

What You Need.
--------------

If you use binary build for version 4.2.0 or later you can skip this section as all required libraries are included in the installation package: Extras pack. Please install the pack and you don't have to worry about libraries any more.

If you run the server from sources or SVN continue reading:

Remote monitoring requires an external library which is implemented in the tigase-extras package to comply with the basic rules - no third-party libraries are needed for the core Tigase server. But you will still need 2 more jar files to conduct remote monitoring activation:

. link:https://projects.tigase.org/projects/tigase-extras/files[tigase-extras] or the link:https://projects.tigase.org/projects/tigase-server/repositoryr[current snapshot].
. *jdmkrt.jar* file from link:https://opendmk.java.net/[OpenDMK] project version 5.1 or later. A copy of this jar file in also available in our maven repository: link:http://maven.tigase.org/openDMK/jdmkrt/1.0-b02/[jdmkrt.jar].

Download both libraries and put them in the libs/ directory.

[[monitoring_activation]]
Activation
----------

You can either run the Tigase installer and use the configuration wizard to activate the monitoring or edit etc/init.properties file and add following line:

[source,bash]
-------------------------------------
--monitoring=jmx:9050,http:9080,snmp:9060
-------------------------------------

As you see there is only a single line where you put list of monitoring servers you want to activate. Each server is responsible for activation of a different protocol and takes a single parameter - port number. There are following protocols supported right now:

- *jmx* - activating monitoring via JMX/RMI
- *http* - activating monitoring over HTTP protocol
- *snmp* - activating monitoring over SNMP protocol

You can have all protocols active at the same time or any combination of them or none.

Security
--------

Both JMX and SNMP offer security protection to limit access to monitoring data. The security configuration is a bit different for both.

[[monitoring_jmx]]
JMX
---


After the server installation or in the SVN repository you can find 2 files in the *etc/* directory: *jmx.access* and *jmx.password*.

- *jmx.access* is a user permission file. You can use it to specify whether the user can access the monitoring data for reading only 'readonly' or with read-write 'readwrite' access. There are example entries in the file already and the content may simply look like:
+
[source,bash]
-------------------------------------
monitor readonly
admin readwrite
-------------------------------------

- *jmx.password* is a user password file. You can set user passwords here and the format again is very simple and the same as for jmx.access. There are example entries already provided for you convenience. Content of the file may look like the example below:
+
[source,bash]
-------------------------------------
admin admin_pass
monitor monitor_pass
-------------------------------------

Using above to files you can control who and how can access the JMX monitoring services.

SNMP
~~~~

Access to SNMP monitoring is controlled using ACL (access control lists) which can be configured in the file  *snmp.acl* located in *etc/* directory. It contains lots of detailed instructions how to setup ACL and restrict access per user, host and what kind access is allowed. The simplest possible configuration may look like this:

[source,bash]
-------------------------------------
acl = {
  {
    communities = public, private
    access = read-only
    managers = public.host.com, private.host.com
  }
  {
    communities = admin
    access = read-write
    managers = localhost, admin.host.com
  }
}
-------------------------------------

You might also need Tigase MIB definition: link:https://projects.tigase.org/projects/tigase-server/repository/changes/src/main/resources/mib/JVM-MANAGEMENT-MIB.mib[TIGASE-MANAGEMENT-MIB.mib] for the server specific statistics. The MIB contains definition for all the server statistics exposed via SNMP.

Commit message:

#4062 Added list and descriptions of statistics fields.

modules/documentation/adminguide/asciidoc/text/Admin_Guide_65_-_Components_-_F_-_Server_Monitoring_-_1_-_Setting_up_Remote_Monitoring_in_the_Server.asciidoc, after:

[[setUpRemoteMonitoring]]
Setting Up Remote Monitoring in the Server
==========================================
:author: unknown
:version: v1.0
:date: 2010-04-06 21:18

Tigase server can be remotely monitored over following protocols: *JMX/RMI*, *SNMP* and *HTTP*. Even though JMX offers the biggest control and visibility to the server states, all of the monitoring services give the same basic set of the server statistics:

- Number of network connections for s2s, c2s and Bosh
- Last second, last minute and last hour load for all main components: SM, MR, c2s, s2s, Bosh, MUC and PubSub
- System statistics - memory usage (heap and non heap) and the server uptime in milliseconds and human readable text.
- Users statistics - number of registered users and number of online user session.

JMX/RMI and SNMP servers offer basic security and can restrict access while the HTTP server doesn't offer any access restriction mechanisms. Therefore HTTP monitoring is recommended to operate behind a firewall.

The monitoring itself causes very low overhead in terms of the resources and CPU consumption on top of the normal Tigase processing requirements so it can be left on without worrying about performance degradation.

*Note.* _This works with the Tigase server from version_ *4.2.0* _or SVN revision_ *1418*.

What You Need.
--------------
Using v7.1.0 and later, statistics binaries are built-in dist-max and no extra files are needed.  If you have downloaded -dist file, you will need tigase-extras.

To ensure, two files are necessary to run monitoring:

. link:https://projects.tigase.org/projects/tigase-extras/files[tigase-extras] or the link:https://projects.tigase.org/projects/tigase-server/repositoryr[current snapshot].
. *jdmkrt.jar* file from link:https://opendmk.java.net/[OpenDMK] project version 5.1 or later. A copy of this jar file in also available in our maven repository: link:http://maven.tigase.org/openDMK/jdmkrt/1.0-b02/[jdmkrt.jar].

Both files should be in the /jars directory.


[[monitoring_activation]]
Activation
----------

You can either run the Tigase installer and use the configuration wizard to activate the monitoring or edit etc/init.properties file and add following line:

[source,bash]
-------------------------------------
--monitoring=jmx:9050,http:9080,snmp:9060
-------------------------------------

As you see there is only a single line where you put list of monitoring servers you want to activate. Each server is responsible for activation of a different protocol and takes a single parameter - port number. There are following protocols supported right now:

- *jmx* - activating monitoring via JMX/RMI
- *http* - activating monitoring over HTTP protocol
- *snmp* - activating monitoring over SNMP protocol

You can have all protocols active at the same time or any combination of them or none.

Security
--------

Both JMX and SNMP offer security protection to limit access to monitoring data. The security configuration is a bit different for both.

[[monitoring_jmx]]
JMX
---


After the server installation or in the SVN repository you can find 2 files in the *etc/* directory: *jmx.access* and *jmx.password*.

- *jmx.access* is a user permission file. You can use it to specify whether the user can access the monitoring data for reading only 'readonly' or with read-write 'readwrite' access. There are example entries in the file already and the content may simply look like:
+
[source,bash]
-------------------------------------
monitor readonly
admin readwrite
-------------------------------------

- *jmx.password* is a user password file. You can set user passwords here and the format again is very simple and the same as for jmx.access. There are example entries already provided for you convenience. Content of the file may look like the example below:
+
[source,bash]
-------------------------------------
admin admin_pass
monitor monitor_pass
-------------------------------------

Using above to files you can control who and how can access the JMX monitoring services.

SNMP
~~~~

Access to SNMP monitoring is controlled using ACL (access control lists) which can be configured in the file  *snmp.acl* located in *etc/* directory. It contains lots of detailed instructions how to setup ACL and restrict access per user, host and what kind access is allowed. The simplest possible configuration may look like this:

[source,bash]
-------------------------------------
acl = {
  {
    communities = public, private
    access = read-only
    managers = public.host.com, private.host.com
  }
  {
    communities = admin
    access = read-write
    managers = localhost, admin.host.com
  }
}
-------------------------------------

You might also need Tigase MIB definition: link:https://projects.tigase.org/projects/tigase-server/repository/changes/src/main/resources/mib/JVM-MANAGEMENT-MIB.mib[TIGASE-MANAGEMENT-MIB.mib] for the server specific statistics. The MIB contains definition for all the server statistics exposed via SNMP.

HTTP
~~~~
Access the server at example.com:9080 and you will be presented with an Agent View.
