modules/documentation/adminguide/asciidoc/text/Admin_Guide_67_-_Components_-_F_-_Server_Monitoring_-_3_-_EventBus.asciidoc, before:

[[eventBus]]
Eventbus
========
:author: Bartosz Malkowski
:date: 2015-04-09 8:56
:version: v1.0 September 2015

:toc:
:numbered:
:website: http://www.tigase.org

New for Tigase version 7.1.0, is an *eventbus* component to help with monitoring has been implemented. This allows you to set thresholds for certain predefined tasks and you or other JIDs can be sent a message when those thresholds are passed. You can even configure a mailer extension to have an E-mail sent to system administrators to let them know!
Lets begin with setup and requirements.

Eventbus is based on limited http://www.xmpp.org/extensions/xep-0060.html[PubSub] specification. Events are delivered to subscribers as normal PubSub notification.

Each component or client may subscribe for specific type of event. Only components on cluster nodes are allowed to publish events.

Setup
-----
This feature requires both the Monitoring component as well as the eventbus component to be loaded in the init.properties file with the following lines:
[source, bash]
-------
--comp-name-1 = eventbus
--comp-class-1 = tigase.disteventbus.component.EventBusComponent

--comp-name-2 = monitor
--comp-class-2 = tigase.monitor.MonitorComponent
-------
As with any component, don't forget to keep the numbering sequential and one number for each component.

How it Works
------------
Event in Eventbus is identified by two elements: name of event and namespace:
[source, xml]
-------
<EventName xmlns="tigase:demo">
  <sample_value>1</sample_value>
</EventName>
-------
Where event name is `EventName` and namespace is `tigase:demo`.

Listeners may subscribe for specific event or for all events with specific namespace. Because in pubsub, there exists only a single node name, so we have to add a way to convert event name and namespace to a node name:
[source]
-------
nodename := eventname + "|" + namespace
-------
So for example to subscribe to `<EventName xmlns="tigase:demo">`, node must be: `EventName|tigase:demo`. In case you wish to subscribe to all events with a specific namespace, use asterisk (`*`) instead of event name: +*|tigase:demo+.

[[availableTasks]]
Available Tasks
---------------
The eventbus monitoring components have several pre-defined tasks that can be monitored and set to trigger. What follows is the list of tasks with the options attributed to each task.

- *disk-task* - Used to check disk usage. +
Available Options
  . +enabled[B]+ - enable or disable task, Boolean value.
  . +period[I]+ - period of running check, Integer value.
  . +threshold+ - percentage of used space on disk, Float value.

- *cpu-temp-task* - Used to check CPU temperature. +
Available Options
  . +enabled[B]+ - enable or disable task, Boolean value.
  . +period[I]+ - period of running check, Integer value.
  . +cpuTempThreshold[I]+ - temperature threshold of CPU in °C.

- *load-checker-task* - Used to check system load. +
Available Options
. +enabled[B]+ - enable or disable task, Boolean value.
. +period[I]+ - period of running check, Integer value.
. +averageLoadThreshold[L]+ - Average percent load threshold, Long value.

- *memory-checker-task* - Used to check memory usage. +
Available Options
. +enabled[B]+ - enable or disable task, Boolean value.
. +period[I]+ - period of running check, Integer value.
. +maxHeapMemUsagePercentThreshold[I]+ - alarm when percent of used Heap memory is larger than, Integer value.
. +maxNonHeapMemUsagePercentThreshold[I]+ - alarm when percent of used Non Heap memory is larger than, Integer value.

- *logger-task* - Used to transmit log entries depending on level entered.
. +enabled[B]+ - enable or disable task, Boolean value.
. +levelThreshold+ - minimal log level that will be the threshold. Possible values are SEVERE, WARNING, INFO, CONFIG, FINE, FINER, FINEST.


Configuration
-------------
Configuration of the eventbus monitor can be done in a few ways; either by lines in init.properties file, or by sending XMPP stanzas to the server.
XMPP stanza configurations will override ones in init.properties, but they will only last until the server resets and then anything in init.properties will remain.

init.properties
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Tasks can be configured in init.properties file. See xref:availableTasks[available tasks] for the tasks that can be setup.

To enable a specific monitor task, use the following line:
-----
monitor/$TASKNAME/enabled[B]=true
-----
where monitor is the component name for tigase.monitor.MonitorComponent, and $TASKNAME is one of the xref:availableTasks[available task names].

This format will be the same for other settings for tasks.  For example:
-----
monitor/$TASKNAME/period=1000
-----
which sets the check period to 1000 milliseconds.

*NOTE* Once triggers have been activated, they will become dormant.  Think of these as fire-once settings.

Subscription Limitations
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
To define list of JIDs allowed to subscribe for events:
[source, bash]
-----
eventbus/affiliations/allowedSubscribers=francisco@denmark.lit,bernardo@denmark.lit
-----
If this is left blank, all users can subscribe.

Configuration via XMPP
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
We can also configure the eventbus monitor component using XMPP stanzas. This allows us to set and change configurations during server runtime. This is done using a series of +iq+ stanzas send to the monitor component.

We can query each component for its current settings using the following stanza.
[source,xml]
-----
<iq type="set" to="monitor@$DOMAIN/disk-task" id="aad0a">
<command xmlns="http://jabber.org/protocol/commands" node="x-config"/>
</iq>
-----

The server will return the component current settings which will make things easier if you wish to edit them. In this case, the server has returned the following to us
[source,xml]
-----
<iq from="monitor@$DOMAIN/disk-task" type="result" id="aad0a" to="alice@coffeebean.local/Psi+">
<command xmlns="http://jabber.org/protocol/commands" status="executing" node="x-config" sessionid="0dad3436-a029-4082-b0e0-04d838c6c0da">
<x xmlns="jabber:x:data" type="">
<title>Task Configuration</title>
<instructions/>
<field type="boolean" label="Enabled" var="x-task#enabled">
<value>0</value>
</field>
<field type="text-single" label="Period [ms]" var="x-task#period">
<value>60000</value>
</field>
<field type="text-single" label="Disk usage ratio threshold" var="threshold">
<value>0.8</value>
</field>
</x>
</command>
</iq>
-----
This tells us that the disk-task setting is not active, has a period of 60000ms, and will trigger when disk usage is over 80%.

To send new settings to the monitor component, we can send a similar stanza back to the monitor component.

[source,xml]
-----
<iq type="set" to="monitor@$DOMAIN/disk-task" id="aad1a">
<command xmlns="http://jabber.org/protocol/commands" node="x-config" sessionid="0dad3436-a029-4082-b0e0-04d838c6c0da">
<x xmlns="jabber:x:data" type="submit">
<field type="boolean" var="x-task#enabled">
<value>0</value>
</field>
<field type="text-single" var="x-task#period">
<value>60000</value>
</field>
<field type="text-single" var="threshold">
<value>0.8</value>
</field>
</x>
</command>
</iq>
-----

To which a successful update will give you an XMPP success stanza to let you know everything is set correctly.

(Include what the response will be from this setting!)

Alternatively, you can update specific settings by editing a single field without adding anything else. For example, if we just wanted to turn the +disk-task+ on we could send the following stanza:

[source,xml]
-----
<iq type="set" to="monitor@$HOSTNAME/disk-task" id="ab53a">
<command xmlns="http://jabber.org/protocol/commands" node="x-config">
<x xmlns="jabber:x:data" type="submit">
<field type="boolean" var="x-task#enabled">
<value>1</value>
</field>
</x>
</command>
</iq>
-----

To set any other values, do not forget that certain parts may need to be changed, specifically the
*<field type="boolean" var=x-task#enabled">*  fields. +
- Your field type will be defined by the type of variable specified in the xref:availableTasks [Available Tasks] section. +
- +var=x task#+ will be followed by the property value taken directly from the xref:availableTasks [Available Tasks] section, minus the data type parameter.

Getting the Message
-------------------
Without a place to send messages to, eventbus will just trigger and shut down. There are two different methods that eventbus can deliver alarm messages and relevant data; XMPP messages and using the mailer extention.

XMPP notification
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
In order to retrieve notifications, a subscription to the +eventbus@tigase.org+ user must be made.
Keep in mind that subscriptions are not persistent across server restarts, or triggers. +
The eventbus schema is very similar to most XMPP subscription requests but with a few tweaks to differentiate it if you wanted to subscibe to a certain task or all of them. Each task is considered a node, and each node has the following pattern: +eventName|eventXMLNS+. Since each monitoring task has the +tigase:monitor:event+ event XMLNS, we just need to pick the event name from the list of tasks.
So like the above example, our event node for the disk task will be +disk-task|tigase:monitor:event+.
Applied to an XMPP stanza, it will look something like this:
[source,xml]
-----
<iq type='set'
    to='eventbus@tigase.org'
    id='sub1'>
  <pubsub xmlns='http://jabber.org/protocol/pubsub'>
    <subscribe node='disk-taskEvent|tigase:monitor:event' jid='$USER_JID'/>
  </pubsub>
</iq>
-----
Don't forget to replace $USER_JID with the bare JID of the user you want to receive those messages. You can even have them sent to a MUC or any component with a JID.
Available events are as follows:
- disk-taskEvent for +disk-task+
- LoggerMonitorEvent for +logger-task+
- HeapMemoryMonitorEvent for +memory-checker-task+
- LoadAverageMonitorEvent for +load-checker-task+
- CPUTempMonitorEvent for +cpu-temp-task+

Alternatively, you can also subscribe to all events within the eventbus by using a wildcard * in place of the event XMLNS like this example:
[source,xml]
-----
<iq type='set'
    to='eventbus@tigase.org'
    id='sub1'>
  <pubsub xmlns='http://jabber.org/protocol/pubsub'>
    <subscribe node='*|tigase:monitor:event' jid='$USER_JID'/>
  </pubsub>
</iq>
-----

Sample notification from Eventbus
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
[source, xml]
-------
<message from='eventbus.shakespeare.lit' to='francisco@denmark.lit' id='foo'>
  <event xmlns='http://jabber.org/protocol/pubsub#event'>
    <items node='EventName|tigase:demo'>
      <item>
        <EventName xmlns="tigase:demo" eventSource="samplecomponent.shakespeare.lit'" eventTimestamp="1444216850">
          <sample_value>1</sample_value>
        </EventName>
      </item>
    </items>
  </event>
</message>
-------

[NOTE]
===============================
If client subscribed node /*|tigase:demo then events will not be sent from
node /*|tigase:demo, but from *real* node
(in this case: `EventName|tigase:demo`).
===============================

Mailer Extension
----------------
Tigase Server Monitor Mailer Extension (TSMME) can send messages from the monitor component to a specified E-mail address so system administrators who are not logged into the XMPP server.

For v7.1.0 versions and later, TSMME is already included in your distribution package and no extra installation is needed.

For versions older than 7.1.0 TSMME requires two files to operate:

- A compiled build of tigase mailer from link:https://projects.tigase.org/projects/tigase-server-ext-mailer/repository[its repository]. Place the compiled .jar file into /jars directory.

- javax.mail.jar file which may be downloaded from link:http://java.net/projects/javamail/downloads/download/javax.mail.jar[this link]. Also place this file in the /jars directory.

-----
monitor/mailer-smtp-host=mail.tigase.org
monitor/mailer-smtp-port=587
monitor/mailer-smtp-username=sender
monitor/mailer-smtp-password=********
monitor/mailer-from-address=sender@tigase.org
monitor/mailer-to-addresses=receiver@tigase.org,admin@tigase.org
-----

- +monitor/mailer-smtp-host+ - SMTP Server hostname.
- +monitor/mailer-smtp-port+ - SMTP Server port.
- +monitor/mailer-smtp-usernam+ - name of sender account.
- +monitor/mailer-smtp-password+ - password of sender account.
- +monitor/mailer-from-address+ - sender email address. It will be set in field from in email.
- +monitor/mailer-to-addresses+ - comma separated notification receivers email addresses.

It is recommended to create a specific e-mail address in your mail server for this purpose only, as the account settings are stored in plaintext without encryption.

Commit message:

Feature #3644: Monitoring established connections on Tigase

modules/documentation/adminguide/asciidoc/text/Admin_Guide_67_-_Components_-_F_-_Server_Monitoring_-_3_-_EventBus.asciidoc, after:

[[eventBus]]
Eventbus
========
:author: Bartosz Malkowski
:date: 2015-04-09 8:56
:version: v1.0 September 2015

:toc:
:numbered:
:website: http://www.tigase.org

New for Tigase version 7.1.0, is an *eventbus* component to help with monitoring has been implemented. This allows you to set thresholds for certain predefined tasks and you or other JIDs can be sent a message when those thresholds are passed. You can even configure a mailer extension to have an E-mail sent to system administrators to let them know!
Lets begin with setup and requirements.

Eventbus is based on limited http://www.xmpp.org/extensions/xep-0060.html[PubSub] specification. Events are delivered to subscribers as normal PubSub notification.

Each component or client may subscribe for specific type of event. Only components on cluster nodes are allowed to publish events.

Setup
-----
This feature requires both the Monitoring component as well as the eventbus component to be loaded in the init.properties file with the following lines:
[source, bash]
-------
--comp-name-1 = eventbus
--comp-class-1 = tigase.disteventbus.component.EventBusComponent

--comp-name-2 = monitor
--comp-class-2 = tigase.monitor.MonitorComponent
-------
As with any component, don't forget to keep the numbering sequential and one number for each component.

How it Works
------------
Event in Eventbus is identified by two elements: name of event and namespace:
[source, xml]
-------
<EventName xmlns="tigase:demo">
  <sample_value>1</sample_value>
</EventName>
-------
Where event name is `EventName` and namespace is `tigase:demo`.

Listeners may subscribe for specific event or for all events with specific namespace. Because in pubsub, there exists only a single node name, so we have to add a way to convert event name and namespace to a node name:
[source]
-------
nodename := eventname + "|" + namespace
-------
So for example to subscribe to `<EventName xmlns="tigase:demo">`, node must be: `EventName|tigase:demo`. In case you wish to subscribe to all events with a specific namespace, use asterisk (`*`) instead of event name: +*|tigase:demo+.

[[availableTasks]]
Available Tasks
---------------
The eventbus monitoring components have several pre-defined tasks that can be monitored and set to trigger. What follows is the list of tasks with the options attributed to each task.

- *disk-task* - Used to check disk usage. +
Available Options
  . +enabled[B]+ - enable or disable task, Boolean value.
  . +period[I]+ - period of running check, Integer value.
  . +threshold+ - percentage of used space on disk, Float value.

- *cpu-temp-task* - Used to check CPU temperature. +
Available Options
  . +enabled[B]+ - enable or disable task, Boolean value.
  . +period[I]+ - period of running check, Integer value.
  . +cpuTempThreshold[I]+ - temperature threshold of CPU in °C.

- *load-checker-task* - Used to check system load. +
Available Options
. +enabled[B]+ - enable or disable task, Boolean value.
. +period[I]+ - period of running check, Integer value.
. +averageLoadThreshold[L]+ - Average percent load threshold, Long value.

- *memory-checker-task* - Used to check memory usage. +
Available Options
. +enabled[B]+ - enable or disable task, Boolean value.
. +period[I]+ - period of running check, Integer value.
. +maxHeapMemUsagePercentThreshold[I]+ - alarm when percent of used Heap memory is larger than, Integer value.
. +maxNonHeapMemUsagePercentThreshold[I]+ - alarm when percent of used Non Heap memory is larger than, Integer value.

- *logger-task* - Used to transmit log entries depending on level entered.
. +enabled[B]+ - enable or disable task, Boolean value.
. +levelThreshold+ - minimal log level that will be the threshold. Possible values are SEVERE, WARNING, INFO, CONFIG, FINE, FINER, FINEST.

- *connections-task* - Use do check users disconnections +
The event will be generated only if both thresholds (amount and percentage) will be fulfilled. +
Available Options
. +enabled[B]+ - enable or disable task, Boolean value.
. +period[I]+ - period of running check, Integer value.
. +thresholdMinimal[I]+ - minimal amount of disconnected users required to generate alarm.
. +threshold[I]+ - minimal percent of disconnected users required to generate alarm.

Configuration
-------------
Configuration of the eventbus monitor can be done in a few ways; either by lines in init.properties file, or by sending XMPP stanzas to the server.
XMPP stanza configurations will override ones in init.properties, but they will only last until the server resets and then anything in init.properties will remain.

init.properties
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Tasks can be configured in init.properties file. See xref:availableTasks[available tasks] for the tasks that can be setup.

To enable a specific monitor task, use the following line:
-----
monitor/$TASKNAME/enabled[B]=true
-----
where monitor is the component name for tigase.monitor.MonitorComponent, and $TASKNAME is one of the xref:availableTasks[available task names].

This format will be the same for other settings for tasks.  For example:
-----
monitor/$TASKNAME/period=1000
-----
which sets the check period to 1000 milliseconds.

*NOTE* Once triggers have been activated, they will become dormant.  Think of these as fire-once settings.

Subscription Limitations
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
To define list of JIDs allowed to subscribe for events:
[source, bash]
-----
eventbus/affiliations/allowedSubscribers=francisco@denmark.lit,bernardo@denmark.lit
-----
If this is left blank, all users can subscribe.

Configuration via XMPP
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
We can also configure the eventbus monitor component using XMPP stanzas. This allows us to set and change configurations during server runtime. This is done using a series of +iq+ stanzas send to the monitor component.

We can query each component for its current settings using the following stanza.
[source,xml]
-----
<iq type="set" to="monitor@$DOMAIN/disk-task" id="aad0a">
<command xmlns="http://jabber.org/protocol/commands" node="x-config"/>
</iq>
-----

The server will return the component current settings which will make things easier if you wish to edit them. In this case, the server has returned the following to us
[source,xml]
-----
<iq from="monitor@$DOMAIN/disk-task" type="result" id="aad0a" to="alice@coffeebean.local/Psi+">
<command xmlns="http://jabber.org/protocol/commands" status="executing" node="x-config" sessionid="0dad3436-a029-4082-b0e0-04d838c6c0da">
<x xmlns="jabber:x:data" type="">
<title>Task Configuration</title>
<instructions/>
<field type="boolean" label="Enabled" var="x-task#enabled">
<value>0</value>
</field>
<field type="text-single" label="Period [ms]" var="x-task#period">
<value>60000</value>
</field>
<field type="text-single" label="Disk usage ratio threshold" var="threshold">
<value>0.8</value>
</field>
</x>
</command>
</iq>
-----
This tells us that the disk-task setting is not active, has a period of 60000ms, and will trigger when disk usage is over 80%.

To send new settings to the monitor component, we can send a similar stanza back to the monitor component.

[source,xml]
-----
<iq type="set" to="monitor@$DOMAIN/disk-task" id="aad1a">
<command xmlns="http://jabber.org/protocol/commands" node="x-config" sessionid="0dad3436-a029-4082-b0e0-04d838c6c0da">
<x xmlns="jabber:x:data" type="submit">
<field type="boolean" var="x-task#enabled">
<value>0</value>
</field>
<field type="text-single" var="x-task#period">
<value>60000</value>
</field>
<field type="text-single" var="threshold">
<value>0.8</value>
</field>
</x>
</command>
</iq>
-----

To which a successful update will give you an XMPP success stanza to let you know everything is set correctly.

(Include what the response will be from this setting!)

Alternatively, you can update specific settings by editing a single field without adding anything else. For example, if we just wanted to turn the +disk-task+ on we could send the following stanza:

[source,xml]
-----
<iq type="set" to="monitor@$HOSTNAME/disk-task" id="ab53a">
<command xmlns="http://jabber.org/protocol/commands" node="x-config">
<x xmlns="jabber:x:data" type="submit">
<field type="boolean" var="x-task#enabled">
<value>1</value>
</field>
</x>
</command>
</iq>
-----

To set any other values, do not forget that certain parts may need to be changed, specifically the
*<field type="boolean" var=x-task#enabled">*  fields. +
- Your field type will be defined by the type of variable specified in the xref:availableTasks [Available Tasks] section. +
- +var=x task#+ will be followed by the property value taken directly from the xref:availableTasks [Available Tasks] section, minus the data type parameter.

Getting the Message
-------------------
Without a place to send messages to, eventbus will just trigger and shut down. There are two different methods that eventbus can deliver alarm messages and relevant data; XMPP messages and using the mailer extention.

XMPP notification
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
In order to retrieve notifications, a subscription to the +eventbus@tigase.org+ user must be made.
Keep in mind that subscriptions are not persistent across server restarts, or triggers. +
The eventbus schema is very similar to most XMPP subscription requests but with a few tweaks to differentiate it if you wanted to subscibe to a certain task or all of them. Each task is considered a node, and each node has the following pattern: +eventName|eventXMLNS+. Since each monitoring task has the +tigase:monitor:event+ event XMLNS, we just need to pick the event name from the list of tasks.
So like the above example, our event node for the disk task will be +disk-task|tigase:monitor:event+.
Applied to an XMPP stanza, it will look something like this:
[source,xml]
-----
<iq type='set'
    to='eventbus@tigase.org'
    id='sub1'>
  <pubsub xmlns='http://jabber.org/protocol/pubsub'>
    <subscribe node='disk-taskEvent|tigase:monitor:event' jid='$USER_JID'/>
  </pubsub>
</iq>
-----
Don't forget to replace $USER_JID with the bare JID of the user you want to receive those messages. You can even have them sent to a MUC or any component with a JID.
Available events are as follows:
- disk-taskEvent for +disk-task+
- LoggerMonitorEvent for +logger-task+
- HeapMemoryMonitorEvent for +memory-checker-task+
- LoadAverageMonitorEvent for +load-checker-task+
- CPUTempMonitorEvent for +cpu-temp-task+

Alternatively, you can also subscribe to all events within the eventbus by using a wildcard * in place of the event XMLNS like this example:
[source,xml]
-----
<iq type='set'
    to='eventbus@tigase.org'
    id='sub1'>
  <pubsub xmlns='http://jabber.org/protocol/pubsub'>
    <subscribe node='*|tigase:monitor:event' jid='$USER_JID'/>
  </pubsub>
</iq>
-----

Sample notification from Eventbus
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
[source, xml]
-------
<message from='eventbus.shakespeare.lit' to='francisco@denmark.lit' id='foo'>
  <event xmlns='http://jabber.org/protocol/pubsub#event'>
    <items node='EventName|tigase:demo'>
      <item>
        <EventName xmlns="tigase:demo" eventSource="samplecomponent.shakespeare.lit'" eventTimestamp="1444216850">
          <sample_value>1</sample_value>
        </EventName>
      </item>
    </items>
  </event>
</message>
-------

[NOTE]
===============================
If client subscribed node /*|tigase:demo then events will not be sent from
node /*|tigase:demo, but from *real* node
(in this case: `EventName|tigase:demo`).
===============================

Mailer Extension
----------------
Tigase Server Monitor Mailer Extension (TSMME) can send messages from the monitor component to a specified E-mail address so system administrators who are not logged into the XMPP server.

For v7.1.0 versions and later, TSMME is already included in your distribution package and no extra installation is needed.

For versions older than 7.1.0 TSMME requires two files to operate:

- A compiled build of tigase mailer from link:https://projects.tigase.org/projects/tigase-server-ext-mailer/repository[its repository]. Place the compiled .jar file into /jars directory.

- javax.mail.jar file which may be downloaded from link:http://java.net/projects/javamail/downloads/download/javax.mail.jar[this link]. Also place this file in the /jars directory.

-----
monitor/mailer-smtp-host=mail.tigase.org
monitor/mailer-smtp-port=587
monitor/mailer-smtp-username=sender
monitor/mailer-smtp-password=********
monitor/mailer-from-address=sender@tigase.org
monitor/mailer-to-addresses=receiver@tigase.org,admin@tigase.org
-----

- +monitor/mailer-smtp-host+ - SMTP Server hostname.
- +monitor/mailer-smtp-port+ - SMTP Server port.
- +monitor/mailer-smtp-usernam+ - name of sender account.
- +monitor/mailer-smtp-password+ - password of sender account.
- +monitor/mailer-from-address+ - sender email address. It will be set in field from in email.
- +monitor/mailer-to-addresses+ - comma separated notification receivers email addresses.

It is recommended to create a specific e-mail address in your mail server for this purpose only, as the account settings are stored in plaintext without encryption.
