modules/documentation/adminguide/asciidoc/text/Admin_Guide_04_-_Quick_Start_-_B_-_Installation_Using_Web_Installer.asciidoc, before:

[[webinstall]]
= Installation Using Web Installer
:author: Eric Dziewa
:version: v1.0, January 2015: New Web Installer!
:Date: 2015-01-15
:revision: v1.1

:toc:
:numbered:
:website: http://tigase.net

When Tigase XMPP Server starts up, it looks for the default configuration file: *etc/init.properties*. If this file has not been modified you can run the web installer. Which will step you through the process of configuring Tigase.
If you are installing Tigase in a Windows environment, please see the xref:winWebInstall[Windows Installation] section.

== Download and Extract

First download Tigase XMPP Server and extract it. You can download the link:https://projects.tigase.org/projects/tigase-server/files[official binaries], or the latest and greatest link:http://build.xmpp-test.net/nightlies/dists/[nightly builds].

[source,bash]
-----
$ wget http://build.xmpp-test.net/nightlies/dists/2015-01-12/tigase-server-7.0.0-SNAPSHOT-b3752-dist-max.tar.gz
$ tar -xf tigase-server-7.0.0-SNAPSHOT-b3752-dist-max.tar.gz
$ cd tigase-server-7.0.0-SNAPSHOT-b3752
-----

Please do not run as root.

== Start the Server

[source,bash]
-----
scripts/tigase.sh start
-----

== Verify Tigase is Running

You should see a list of listening ports.

[source,bash]
-----
$ lsof -i -P
COMMAND   PID   USER   FD   TYPE   DEVICE SIZE/OFF NODE NAME
java    18387 tigase  141u  IPv6 22185825      0t0  TCP *:8080 (LISTEN)
java    18387 tigase  148u  IPv6 22185834      0t0  TCP *:5222 (LISTEN)
java    18387 tigase  149u  IPv6 22185835      0t0  TCP *:5223 (LISTEN)
java    18387 tigase  150u  IPv6 22185836      0t0  TCP *:5290 (LISTEN)
java    18387 tigase  151u  IPv6 22185837      0t0  TCP *:5280 (LISTEN)
java    18387 tigase  152u  IPv6 22185838      0t0  TCP *:5269 (LISTEN)
-----

[[connecttoWebInstall]]
== Connect to the Web Installer

Some points before you can connect:

. If AuthRepository is not configured then access is allowed (initial installation).
. If it is accessed on localhost then access is allowed.
. If user is authenticated by jid and password as user from admins of Tigase XMPP Server then access is allowed.
. In other case access is denied.

Point your browser to *http://localhost:8080/setup/* unless you are working remotely. Then you can use the domain name, or IP address. I used http://tpub.xmpp-test.net:8080/setup/ for this guide.

== Step Through the Installation Process

You will be greeted by the following "About software" page.

image:images/web-install-01.png[]

Read it and then click "Next"

image:images/web-install-02.png[]

Here we have the licensing page. Please read though the agreement, type your name and click "Next".

image:images/web-install-03.png[]

The software reads your current *etc/init.properties* file and presents it. Here we have a bare bones new installation. Click "Next".

image:images/web-install-04.png[]

Here we have the domain, database type, and admin account configuration screen. I've chosen Derby. Possible options are MySQL, PostgresSQL, and SQLServer. Tick the advanced box if you think you want a non standard installation.

image:images/web-install-05.png[]

The Advanced configuration page. Select what you need.

image:images/web-install-06.png[]

Plugins which will be loaded by the server.

image:images/web-install-07.png[]

This is where the database schema is installed.

image:images/web-install-08.png[]

You should see a page like this after success.

image:images/web-install-09.png[]

The installation is complete and this is what the new *init.properties* will look like. Click "Save" to write the file to disk.

image:images/web-install-10.png[]

Setup has finished. Go back into the installation directory and restart.

[source,bash]
-----
$ scripts/tigase.sh stop
$ scripts/tigase.sh start
-----

To further fine tune the server you should edit etc/tigase.conf. Ensure *JAVA_HOME* path is correct, and increase memory if needed using *JAVA_OPTIONS* -Xmx (max), and -Xms (initial). You will need to direct Tigase to read settings from this file on startup as follows.

[source,bash]
-----
$ scripts/tigase.sh start etc/tigase.conf
-----

Everything should be running smooth at this point. Check the logfiles in logs/ if you experience any problems.

[[winWebInstall]]
== Windows Instructions for using Web Installer

There are a few steps involved with setting up Tigase with the web installer in a Windows environment.  Please follow this guide.

First step is to extract the dist-max archive in it's entirety to the intended running directory.  Once there, run the Setup.bat file inside the win-stuff folder.  This will move the necessary files to the correct folders before Tigase begins operation.

From here, you have a few options how to run Tigase; run.bat will operate Tigase using a java command, or run.bat which will start Tigase using the wrapper.  You may also install Tigase and run it as a service.

One this setup is finished, web installer will continue the same from xref:connecttoWebInstall[here].

Commit message:

#4272 Web Install Setup Access Documentation

modules/documentation/adminguide/asciidoc/text/Admin_Guide_04_-_Quick_Start_-_B_-_Installation_Using_Web_Installer.asciidoc, after:

[[webinstall]]
= Installation Using Web Installer
:author: Eric Dziewa
:version: v1.0, January 2015: New Web Installer!
:Date: 2015-01-15
:revision: v1.1

:toc:
:numbered:
:website: http://tigase.net

When Tigase XMPP Server starts up, it looks for the default configuration file: *etc/init.properties*. If this file has not been modified you can run the web installer. Which will step you through the process of configuring Tigase.
If you are installing Tigase in a Windows environment, please see the xref:winWebInstall[Windows Installation] section.

== Download and Extract

First download Tigase XMPP Server and extract it. You can download the link:https://projects.tigase.org/projects/tigase-server/files[official binaries], or the latest and greatest link:http://build.xmpp-test.net/nightlies/dists/[nightly builds].

[source,bash]
-----
$ wget http://build.xmpp-test.net/nightlies/dists/2015-01-12/tigase-server-7.0.0-SNAPSHOT-b3752-dist-max.tar.gz
$ tar -xf tigase-server-7.0.0-SNAPSHOT-b3752-dist-max.tar.gz
$ cd tigase-server-7.0.0-SNAPSHOT-b3752
-----

Please do not run as root.

== Start the Server

[source,bash]
-----
scripts/tigase.sh start
-----

== Verify Tigase is Running

You should see a list of listening ports.

[source,bash]
-----
$ lsof -i -P
COMMAND   PID   USER   FD   TYPE   DEVICE SIZE/OFF NODE NAME
java    18387 tigase  141u  IPv6 22185825      0t0  TCP *:8080 (LISTEN)
java    18387 tigase  148u  IPv6 22185834      0t0  TCP *:5222 (LISTEN)
java    18387 tigase  149u  IPv6 22185835      0t0  TCP *:5223 (LISTEN)
java    18387 tigase  150u  IPv6 22185836      0t0  TCP *:5290 (LISTEN)
java    18387 tigase  151u  IPv6 22185837      0t0  TCP *:5280 (LISTEN)
java    18387 tigase  152u  IPv6 22185838      0t0  TCP *:5269 (LISTEN)
-----

[[connecttoWebInstall]]
== Connect to the Web Installer

Some points before you can connect:

This setup page is restricted access, however for first setup there is a default account set to setup Tigase:
Username: admin
Password: tigase

This combination will only be valid once as it will be removed from init.properties file on compleation of setup process.  After this point the setup page will only be accessable using the following:

. JID accounts listed as administrators in --admins line in init.properties
. Username and password combinations added to init.properties file manually, or at the last page in this process.

Point your browser to *http://localhost:8080/setup/* unless you are working remotely. Then you can use the domain name, or IP address. I used http://tpub.xmpp-test.net:8080/setup/ for this guide.

Enter the username and password above to gain access.

== Step Through the Installation Process

You will be greeted by the following "About software" page.

image:images/web-install-01.png[]

Read it and then click "Next"

image:images/web-install-02.png[]

Here is some information about our commercial products and licensing. Please read though the agreement, type your name or company and click "Next".

image:images/web-install-03.png[]

The software reads your current *etc/init.properties* file and presents it. It will look fairly sparce.  If you have a pre-configured init.properties file, you may load it here. If not, click "Next".

image:images/web-install-04.png[]

This page will look over your default configuration settings, these include the type, Domains you wish to use, and gives you a chance to specify an administrator for the domain.  Also, you will be selecting what type of database Tigase server will be using.

image:images/web-install-05.png[]

The Advanced configuration page. Select what components and configurations you need.

image:images/web-install-06.png[]

Plugins which will be loaded by the server, most plugins are enabled by default.

image:images/web-install-07.png[]

This is where the database schema is installed. *BE SURE TO SPECIFY SUPER USER ACCOUNT AND PASSWORD*

image:images/web-install-08.png[]

You should see a page like this after a successful database setup.  This page will reveal any issues with your database setup such as invalid URIs, passwords, and schemas.

image:images/web-install-09.png[]

Next a page asking if you'd like to provide an API Access Key to access HTTP REST commands.  It is highly recommended that you either specify an API key or block access.  Open API keys allow any REST command to be interpreted by the server.

image:images/web-install-10.png[]

The Setup Access Page will be locked from the admin/tigase user as specified above.  This is your chance to have the setup pages add a specific user in addition to admin accounts to re-access this setup process later.  If left blank, only JIDs listed in admin will be allowed to access.

image:images/web-install-11.png[]

The installation is complete and this is what the new *init.properties* will look like. Click "Save" to write the file to disk.

image:images/web-install-12.png[]

You have now finished the installation, proceed to the next step to restart the server.

== Restart the Server

[source,bash]
-----
$ scripts/tigase.sh restart
-----

To further fine tune the server you should edit etc/tigase.conf. Ensure *JAVA_HOME* path is correct, and increase memory if needed using *JAVA_OPTIONS* -Xmx (max), and -Xms (initial). You will need to direct Tigase to read settings from this file on startup as follows.

[source,bash]
-----
$ scripts/tigase.sh start etc/tigase.conf
-----

Everything should be running smooth at this point. Check the logfiles in logs/ if you experience any problems.

[[winWebInstall]]
== Windows Instructions for using Web Installer

There are a few steps involved with setting up Tigase with the web installer in a Windows environment.  Please follow this guide.

First step is to extract the dist-max archive in it's entirety to the intended running directory.  Once there, run the Setup.bat file inside the win-stuff folder.  This will move the necessary files to the correct folders before Tigase begins operation.

From here, you have a few options how to run Tigase; run.bat will operate Tigase using a java command, or run.bat which will start Tigase using the wrapper.  You may also install Tigase and run it as a service.

One this setup is finished, web installer will continue the same from xref:connecttoWebInstall[here].
