modules/documentation/devguide/asciidoc/text/Development_Guide_30_-_Component_Implementation_-_Lesson_7_-_Data_Repository.asciidoc, before:

[[cil7]]
Component Implementation - Lesson 7 - Data Repository
=====================================================
Artur Hefczyc <artur.hefczyc@tigase.net>
v2.0, June 2014: Reformatted for AsciiDoc.
:toc:
:numbered:
:website: http://tigase.net/
:Date: 2010-04-06 21:22

There are cases when you want to store some data permanently by your component. You can of course use the component configuration to provide some database connection settings, implement your own database connector and store records you need. There is, however, a very simple and useful framework which allows you to read and store some data transparently in either database or disk file. The framework also supports ad-hoc commands interface straight away so you can manipulate your component data using a good XMPP client.

This guide will teach you how to create a simple data repository and use it in your component. The repository can be automatically exposed via ad-hoc commands and you can change your data from any XMPP client.

Commit message:

Short guide on RepositoryFactory; resolves #2603

modules/documentation/devguide/asciidoc/text/Development_Guide_30_-_Component_Implementation_-_Lesson_7_-_Data_Repository.asciidoc, after:

[[Component_Implementation_-_Lesson_7_-_Data_Repository]]
== Component Implementation - Lesson 7 - Data Repository

=== ConfigRepository

There are cases when you want to store some data permanently by your component. You can of course use the component configuration to provide some database connection settings, implement your own database connector and store records you need. There is, however, a very simple and useful framework which allows you to read and store some data transparently in either database or disk file. The framework also supports ad-hoc commands interface straight away so you can manipulate your component data using a good XMPP client.

In order to use it one needs to extend `tigase.db.comp.ConfigRepository` abstract class.

=== RepositoryFactory

In order to have more freedom while accessing repositories it's possible to use `tigase.db.RepositoryFactory` and any of the methods that pertain to desired type of repository one wants to access (auth, user, data):

* `RepositoryFactory.getAuthRepository()`
* `RepositoryFactory.getUserRepository()`
* `RepositoryFactory.getDataRepository()`

Each method takes same set of arguments:

* _class_name_ - qualified name of the class that implements aforementioned repositories type
* _URI_ - repository URI
* _params_ - map containing additional configuration for the connection.

If there is already available repository for the `<class_name><URI>` identifier then it's returned, otherwise new instance is created.
